---
layout: text
title: "The Endless Nightmare from Which I Cannot Wake: Gay Marriage edition"
lead: "I really didn’t want to talk about this –- ever."
slug: gay-marriage
tags:
- politics
- state
- love
- marriage
---

I really didn’t want to talk about this –- ever.  I am dead serious. The main reason for my hesitance is because I got myself embroiled in this debate during my undergraduate and hated every god forsaken minute of it. The conservatives always pushed for something incredibly stupid and the more left winged self righteous would sit on the fence and talk about human rights. The two sides would just reenact their own version of the Somme spitting venom at each other. I tried, then, to have an honest discussion on this topic at the time and I was just left bloody and quite lifeless in No Man’s land.

The topic was same-sex marriage and I thought I was done with this shit in 2004. Canada did something about it via the most polite method possible;  out of deference to Canadian traditions.  Then the prop 8 shit bubbled up and for a second time we were sent back into the trenches. This time, because it was American, it had higher production values and far less polite. Again, I got stuck trying to be reasonable and ended up corpse in No Man’s land once more. Despite the fact that my argument was more lucid and well developed.

In 2010 it was the Argentine government that legalised gay marriage right before Judge Walker’s decision on the [Perry vs. Schwarzenegger](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perry_v._Schwarzenegger). This time the debate was very much on the pro side of things but for what reason. I know only of two people that have read the full [Perry vs. Schwarzenegger ruling](https://ecf.cand.uscourts.gov/cand/09cv2292/files/09cv2292-ORDER.pdf) and even less people that are versed in Argentine law but all the people that I have chosen to associate myself with said that these were great victories. There was no thought. There was no discussion that mistakes could have been made. There was just the people that read the top 100 words of some blog or tumblr account and looked at me askance because I was not hip hip hooraying before even finishing the first paragraph.

Now its 2011 and the Canadians have returned to their polite traditions in [an attempt to scale back this whole gay marriage thing](http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/prairies/same-sex-nuptials-cant-be-refused-on-religious-grounds-saskatchewan-court-rules/article1863987/) and based on the news outlets on the matter I sincerely doubt that any thought will come out of this round of discussion. So now I am pissed off just because I have been hearing the same things for 6 years and I am tired. So this time I am putting in print just so when the next round comes up I can just post a link.

Let slip the dogs of *frisson* commentors and let me sink into the muck once again. Hopefully this time around the final shot might at least leave an up stretched arm, entangled in razor wire, with a cliched butterfly landing on my lifeless right pointer finger. Hopefully in sepia.

###In The Beginning

The first myth I must dispense with is that marriage has not always carried the same meaning. This love and marriage being hitched together is not a tradition. Sure everyone was in agreement that it would be nice if you loved your wife or husband but it was hardly necessary and in some cases it could be a bit much.[Pompey was mocked for spending far to much to time with his wife](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pompey#Caesar_and_the_First_Triumvirate) and not enough time with boys. The institution was simply not designed to handle love in any modern capacity or even in an ancient one.

“What was the goal?” I hear rattling around there in future perfect land. Well the goal was to simply to protect patriarchal family lines and property.

It is very easy, for obvious reasons, to identify maternal lines but it was very difficult to make 100% sure who the father is unless you happen to have DNA testing;  which most ancient societies were having a bit of trouble perfecting. This is further complicated, as far as the state is concerned, when they started to link property rights and caste rights to the male side of the society. So a somewhat clever solution is devise the marriage contract to make it easier for the state to make certain to which male is legitimate heir to their father’s empire and status in an official capacity. This is also the reason why there is a fairly common cultural lietmotif about women not being loyal to their husbands as being particularly scandalous, or the man being particularly stupid/naïve, whereas the opposite seems to be a matter of course.

###They Weren't Called Dark Because They Ran Out of Candles

Does any of the above have any relevance to the modern context? Yes and no. The problem is that the legal context of marriage is still set up with the above ideas in mind. The law does not care about the current more emotional context that has something to do with love springing eternal that is so popular with the young kids these days. By these days I mean since the late middle ages.

In between massacring a much more civilized culture, not bathing, and believing in [divine poultry](http://engineerofknowledge.blogspot.com/2010/03/first-crusade-accounts-of-eyewitnesses.html"sorry the only online source I could find") the Europeans developed a taste for Romance stories. Knights winning a lady's hand and finding as true a corporeal love as perfect as their love with god(cough). These are merely cute stories to amuse the gentry and to make up bad pick up lines for the age. Remember the same stories have giants, dragons and what not. More or less fantastical reflections of the Norman feudal power structures and nothing more.

These stories were never supposed to have anything to do with reality; which can be seen directly in the very madness of Don Quixote.(For those that have not read this book, in short, he was driven mad because he fell in love with a women below his station and read to much of the this Green knight and Lancelot shit so he created a rather elaborate fantasy to support this need for perfect love. For the rest of the book he is beaten senseless with alarming frequency) Further more the lesser classes were considered to have a less gentile version of love. I once came across a guide on how to have sex with that desirable serf which invades your dreams -- they seem to to like being taken from behind against a tree or shrubbery. No need for chit chat or anything else.

Despite all the rhetoric put together by the best spoony bards of the day if you start to read these texts carefully it begins to become apparent that they are more about the caste system of Europe than having anything to do with an essential definition of love. Think of any the standard plot twist where a knight falls in love with some lowly serf, or some other sort of peasant, only to find out that said object of affection is actually of the same station, or higher, but was switched at birth. After all the bards could not offend their paying audience.﻿

###Let Them Eat (Wedding) Cake

The middle age culture is important because as the merchant classes started demanding that everyone to be considered as equal citizens; as long as they were male and owned land but this would change to be more inclusive overtime. They did not, however, want to lower the nobles to them, or return them to a natural state as some of the enlightenment cats would put it, but rather elevate themselves to nobility. This made the bourgeoisie aristocratic in a fashion. They, and by they I mean we at this particular juncture point in history, became the heirs of all their bullshit and tried our best to emulate them despite not having the various other tiers of humanity to supported such a silly system. Which leads to the new problem of modern marriage.

Now mind you, if only the nobles got married then it would be a nice a small system that only a few families would have, or even need, the appropriate paperwork. When the modern romantic writers (looking at you Goethe!) came around they did their best to expand the mythos so that everybody could fall in love with this divine carnal other. Yay! Still this was merely a first attempt and Goethe was being held back by the two facts that his society did not have a particular grasp on the whole idea behind irony and much of it was illiterate anyway. The final nail for the social meaning to resemble the traditional legal model came in the early twentieth century with new mass media like the cinema and radio.

These two delivery platforms were truly democratic ways of telling stories. No education required and when that was coupled with Hollywood, and Hollywood specifically, censor codes it had the ability to shape an entire generation desire a particular narrative for their own lives.

You see, the descendants of various puritans, a rather boring bunch with the exception of Milton, decided that it was inappropriate to discuss sex in the cinema. Actually, come to think of it,  I am pretty sure that they did not want to discuss sex at all but the cinema is really the only thing pertinent here. The censors codes were put there to protect the moral fibre of those puritans. This was a particularly stupid decision because writers are known for being clever and censors are known for being stupid. One of the lesser known truisms of history.

Not everything is like the end of North By Northwest or fretting about [Godfrey’s buttons](http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080529/REVIEWS08/925898329/1023) but that will get you up to speed on what could easily be slipped past censors. The problem is this could easily be slipped by children as well. The happy ending where there is a wedding, which in the writers, and the majority of the ﻿contemporaneous audiences minds, [meant ***sex***](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XQ71iwFhry8&amp;t=10m7s)</a> became the expression of eternal love - which is not only sexless but necessarily sexless because the message got passed the censors.

That is how we got confused and this started an entire generation to be searching for this eternal search as a cultural ethos. Not just eternal love but eternal heterosexual monogamous love because that was the only thing the censors would approve. And of course the ultimate expression of that is big elegantly produced white wedding. Nothing could be more Hollywood than the big wedding. Its a good way to fill up the screen with activity and everybody loves of wedding because there is a lot of movement on screen. It is the cinematic equivalent of jingling your keys in front of the audience.

Even I fall victim to these types of thoughts despite being perfectly aware of what is kicking about in the superego. Just think how often you end up really liking someone and maybe even loving them but are having a hard time switching gears into a more lecherous mode which is necessary to maintain a real healthy relationship. Or worse yet when [I come to my own home, at midnight, and take it as an injury](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0166198/ "The Fountain of Youth"). Luckily there is always a well stocked liquor cabinet in the places I call home.

###The Vesting Power

None of this is particularly problematic for each individual. I can get over my sexless romantic issues with some ease. I shouldn’t really have to but it is simple to over ride such instructions produced by the *They* (this is an inferior translation of the Heideggerian *Das Mann* with a bit of Freudian Superego mixed in). Sure it can be a little traumatic and usually we associate the overcoming of this trauma as a symptom of growing up. Which, as an aside, should show that the model of our stories as nurturing and productive fables obviously have something wrong with them if they run counter to us being productive adults. Make up new stories damn it.

The problem is more of a imposition on the state. I don’t really think any of us think that the odd collection of bureaucracy and lawyers that make up the administrative side of any government’s marriage system really care whether or not the interested parties are in love. At least I don’t rationally believe this and I don’t think anyone else does because at all the weddings I have attended I have never seen the charming clerk that gave the happy couple the form to register for the happy event. Then again most happy couples that I know seem to be a little on a rude side. I am *still* waiting on my thank you cards people.

You see, the state considers marriage as much as it was originally formulated. This is why there are those peculiar laws governing citizenship. Marry someone and they instantly become what you are. Why? Well because then the resulting child would obviously have to be a citizen in same type as the parents. There is still no real way of saying that you are half a citizen of somewhere. The binary is still either you are not a citizen or you are. The recent trick is to allow for dual citizenship which is the legal codes nod to quantum physics. You are what you are observed as at a particular moment.

Still the reason for the binary is because of the way the Nation-State is trying to work through it constitutional issues. If all people born within its borders are forever more to be citizens of the great then it would have to stand to reason that one of the easier ways to track this would be through the marriage system. Not only that but since the Nation-State requires eternal existence it would also be prudent that to bribe (the tax cuts that usually accompany the marriage contract) those that will have children with in the watchful eye of the state and by approval of the state parameters as to what it wants to be.

An example would be the fact that most countries, or whatever body gets to define marriage, -- I think each state in United States of America gets to do this which I find ontologically confusing but I will leave that for another day -- usually disapprove of inbreeding for rather obvious reasons but if a brother and sister wanted to marry when they are post-reproductively useful, the state would still intercede and say that they could not marry. Which does not make sense if marriage was not solely, or at least the major function, was about the creation of new little bulbous citizens.

The only reason for this is because the state considers marriage to be a way to manage the children that keep appearing after people shack up. This is also why gay marriage did not come up as an issue until it was forced. The state didn’t care. By state I mean the functionaries of the administrative side of marriage. The corrective force of nationhood may, has, and does care about sexuality for other, not entirely unrelated, reasons.

This is the main problem that the state takes, notice I did not say politicians, issue with the whole gay marriage thing. There is nothing other than an administrative headache, for those civil servants that have to deal with it, and beyond that a cost to the entire citizenry with no added benefit to the state. Sure some singular people may be happier about their status but is it worth the headache of watching all the marriages and divorces when it does not pertain to the state at all. It is my opinion that it is not worth the pain and suffering to start putting more strain on an already overtaxed system.

Still the problem chief problem with our current marriage system is not entirely that homosexual couples want enter into marital bliss. The real problem is that divorce rates are ridiculously high for system that is not designed to deal with divorce.

Divorce was supposed to be function as a weird exception to cover infidelity and few other problems. Now it is a fix for circa 50% of marriages that occur which is the reason no fault divorce came into most legal codes in the latter half of the last century. It was put there to make the administration of these divorces easier and not to make people feel better. Mind you this action was like putting a bandaid on femoral arterial bleed but still it was at least an acknowledgement that something was wrong. Gay marriage would be like ripping the bandaid off really, really, slowly so that you can feel every hair being pulled out one by one.

Sure the administrational problem of dealing with another 10% of any regional population wanting to intermarry would not be a huge undertaking and I doubt anyone has noticed that much more paper work in countries where gay marriage is legal -- well, yet anyway because most of these countries have a sample group of little over a decade at the most. The problem that I foresee coming is that the marriage system will eventually collapse as divorce rates and remarrying rates rise. This will put enough pressure that the budgetary concerns, especially for those governments that claim to be fiscally frugal, running such a department will become financially unreasonable. Still, I would like to repeat, it is mainly heterosexual divorce that is causing the problems but adding homosexual marriage and divorce is just not helping.

It can be the straw that broke the camels back and my worry is that it will be blamed for the collapse. There will be a simple causal link. Gay marriage introduced and 10 years latter the marriage system becomes to cumbersome for the state to handle. The simple causal link would be false of course and only be as accurate as saying that the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand was the cause for the first world war but then again I see that lazy type of research in a lot of high school history books so it is not like my concern is unjustified.  This would be the last thing needed for the gay rights and acceptance movement needs. In fact I think it would set the whole thing back by decades of hard won victories but [at least some people will feel better when walking into a bank(p.12)](https://ecf.cand.uscourts.gov/cand/09cv2292/files/09cv2292-ORDER.pdf).

###I Am the Law

Fine, some of you may have noticed that I do not care that much about people's feelings. I trample on lots of people's feelings everyday and I hope some of you reading this are vaguely insulted by me. At least some of you might have to think while writing your angry comment but I don’t think feelings are a good measure for a legal system.

A good example of this being a bad idea is what happened in Quebec’s language laws. The Québécois, again for the latter part of the last century, became increasing cranky about what they observed as cultural erosion caused by the vast majority of English speakers in the rest of the country. This is an irrational fear to a certain degree but it is a fairly average and normal fear so I am willing to entertain it. The problem is that their solution to the problem was not the best. They simply made English signs illegal. Okay fine it is not très difficle to make out French signs when floating about Montréal so I have no particular issue with this aspect but because this was proposed legally a particular brand of legal stupidity arose.

This is the case of the arrêt sign. For those of you that don’t speak french, arrêt simply means stop and yes they have bothered to translate stop on the trusty old octagon. I honestly would not have cared if I had not been to a great many different places on Earth and have noticed the presence of stop signs in many other countries like Greece and Greece does not even bother with the Latin alphabet.

This is not a lament on a culture of opportunism, although I am willing to bet that the arrêt sign was designed as an opportunistic as an effect of the irrational law, or the stupidity of the Québécois as a people; maybe the lawyers a little and the politicians. It is merely an way to show you what the law actually is, dear reader. It is a weapon and it must be a razor sharp weapon that is very precise. Otherwise you may end up with [this](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wvJiYrRcfQo&amp;feature=related) and to be honest this is the level of apparent intelligence that happens with these laws that are not particularly sharp.

I fear that this is what is happening with marital law lately. Just by adding things with no apparent reason creates this huge bludgeoning weapon that can in fact have consequences far beyond the intended. I.e. Immigration, adoption, taxation, and so on and so forth. It is true that this love garbage is the most irrational thing I can fathom but still shouldn’t that be an argument against the government having any amount of power over such a dominion.

I feel, in the most ironic way possible, that the politicians have to write a new draft on the purpose of marriage as it pertains to the state which as I have stated should surround the idea of children given the way the nation-state excuses its ‘possession’ of a citizenry. To be clear this should not be done to exclude gay marriage at all. In fact it should be done in such a way to promote the inheritance lines of adoptive children and give tax breaks to only those that raise children. Meaning that couples that live together and have happy lives without the need of the ankle biters ruining a perfectly romantic situation will not get the added tax benefit as well as being happy. You shouldn't be allowed to have everything.

Sure that means that the parliament will have to say some unpopular things like “We don’t care about love” and that they would be quite frankly be bribing people to have children ; they are already in the practice but they are not frank about it. A small price to pay honestly because the administration of marriage will be much easier it was just a rider programme attached to birth certificate or adoption papers thus saving the government a great deal of money on maintaining an autonomous department for this marital system.

This would not stop anyone from having a religious ceremony or having a party where everyone drinks to much and notices that the familial resemblance of arhythmic gyrating but it just wouldn’t be a bother to the state. I have many parties that I don’t tell the Canadian government about and some of those parties are more fun that any wedding I have attended but the spread is usually worse. I think that has more to do with my mediocre tax bracket rather than me not getting married.

Sure it will be a new modern system for a new modern age but I don’t see why that is so frightening. That is more or less what is asked by the gay rights movement but please let us do it smartly. Shallow and hollow victories are annoying and they never do anything substantially positive. It just decent public relations. It is this case it might be better that the government does not relate to the public but rather do something beneficial as members of the public. In fact they should do that all the time but I have long ago learnt to abandon my dreams. Hopefully I will not live to the day that customs officials have [*Lasciate ogne speranza, voi ch'intrate*](http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Dante_Alighieri#The_Inferno) above their little nooks but luckily I don’t think I will have to live to the age of hyperbole.
